readme.md, before:

# mongoose-models

An extension of Mongoose's models, see [npm:mongoose-models](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mongoose-models)

## Install

```bash
$ npm install mongoose-models
# installed
```

## Test

Uses [ava](https://github.com/avajs/ava) test runner

`$ npm test`

## Usage

### Init

- `url` - url for mongodb server to be used for these models
- `modelPath` - the full path to where model files are to be loaded from
- `modelIgnorePattern` - pattern of files to ignore when loading models
- `types` - extra types to be loaded (can include custom types via filepath using prefix `/` or `.` such as `./custom_types/title`)
- `debug` - to enable/disable debug messages when loading types and models registry

Note: `email` and `url` come with `mongoose-types` module.

```javascript
var path = require('path')
require('mongoose-models').init({
	url: 'mongodb://localhost/dbname',
	types: [ 'email', 'url', 'uuid', `./custom_types/title` ],
	modelPath: path.resolve(__dirname, 'models'),
	modelIgnorePattern: /index|\.test/
	debug: true
});
```

#### models/Person.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Person = models.create('Person', {

	// If this is given and truthy, the mongoose-types timestamps
	// plugin will be loaded for this model creating automatically
	// updating 'createdAt' and 'updatedAt' properties
	useTimestamps: true,

	// Define your mongoose schema here
	schema: {
		firstName: String,
		lastName: String,

		// Special types like Email, Url, and ObjectId can be accessed
		// through the models.types object
		email: models.types.Email,
		website: models.types.Url
	},

	// Instance methods can be defined here, eg.
	//
	//  Person.findOne({ firstName: 'bob' }, function(err, bob) {
	//    bob.sendEmail(...);
	//  });
	//
	methods: {

		sendEmail: function(subject, msg) {
			someMailingLib.sendEmail(this.email, subject, msg);
		}

	},

	// Anything other than the above properties is considered a static
	// properties and stored directly on the model, eg.
	//
	//  Person.findByName('bob', function(err, bob) {
	//    ...
	//  });
	//
	findByName: function(name, callback) {
		name = name.split(' ');
		var lookup = { firstName: name[0] };
		if (name.length > 1) {
			lookup.lastName = name.pop();
		}
		Person.findOne(lookup, callback);
	}

});
```

#### some-other-file.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Person = models.require('Person')();

Person.findByName('bob', function(err, bob) {

});
```

### Circular References

Circular references are rather messy in Mongoose. To make this much easier there is built-in support for circular references in mongoose-models. For example, say you have two models:

#### Foo.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Bar = models.require('Bar')();

models.create('Foo', {
	schema: {
		bar: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: Bar }
	}
});
```

#### Bar.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Foo = models.require('Foo')();

models.create('Bar', {
	schema: {
		foo: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: Foo }
	}
});
```

This doesn't work because the models are trying to reference each other before they have been created. To make this work, we change the `ref` value like so in both files:

```javascript
{
	bar: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: {$circular: 'Bar'} }
}
```

```javascript
{
	foo: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: {$circular: 'Foo'} }
}
```

Now everything works as expected. There is also a shorter version of this if a model needs to reference itself recursively.

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

models.create('Baz', {
	schema: {
		child: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: '$circular' }
	}
});
```

### models.require(...)

The `models.require` method that loads models does not return the model directly, but instead returns a function that can be used to fetch the model. This is so that when two models make use of each other, the models are allowed time to set themselves up. That is why models are loaded as `models.require(...)()`. This returned function has a number of properties on it that can be used as well.

#### models.require(...).model

The model function itself (once defined). This is the same as what is returned from the getter function.

#### models.require(...).schema

The mongoose schema object. This can be accessed immediately without waiting for the model to be created if you need access sooner. This could be used as an alternative to the `$circular` syntax described above.

#### models.require(...).resolve( callback )

Defines a callback to be run once the model has been created.

```javascript
var Foo = models.require('Foo');
Foo.resolve(function() { Foo = Foo.model; });
```

### Debugging REPL

The REPL is a simple JavaScript interpreter with access to your mongoose-models. Before using the REPL, it will need to be loaded and configured.

```bash
$ cp ./node_modules/mongoose-models/bin/repl.js ./repl.js
```

Now, open up `repl.js` and change the values in `conf` to match your configuration settings. You can start the REPL by running:

```bash
$ node repl.js
```

The REPL comes with some helpful features on top of the standard node REPL. First, mongoose-models is already loaded for you and is available as `models`. Second, `models.require` has been patched to automatically store loaded models in `global`. There are also some useful functions defined.

```javascript
Loading REPL...
> models.require('Foo');
undefined
> Foo.find({ }, store('foos'));
{ ... }
>
Stored 2 arguments in "foos"
> print(foos);
{
  '1': ...
  '2': ...
  ...
}
```

Commit message:

use classify to resolve filename by default

readme.md, after:

# mongoose-models

An extension of Mongoose's models, see [npm:mongoose-models](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mongoose-models)

## Install

```bash
$ npm install mongoose-models
# installed
```

## Test

Uses [ava](https://github.com/avajs/ava) test runner

`$ npm test`

## Usage

### Init

- `url` - url for mongodb server to be used for these models
- `types` - extra types to be loaded (can include custom types via filepath using prefix `/` or `.` such as `./custom_types/title`)
- `debug` - to enable/disable debug messages when loading types and models registry

#### Load models config

- `model` - config Object for how to load models
- `model.ignore` - function or a pattern of files that when match will be ignored
- `model.filePath` - full path to where model files are to be loaded from
- `resolveName` - function to resolve file names to model identifiers. By default uses `classify` from [underscore.string](https://github.com/epeli/underscore.string)

- `modelPath` same as `model.filePath`
- `resolveModelName` same as `model.resolveName`
- `ignore` same as `model.ignore`

`email` and `url` come with the `mongoose-types` module.

```javascript
var path = require('path')
require('mongoose-models').init({
	debug: true,
	url: 'mongodb://localhost/dbname',
	types: [ 'email', 'url', 'uuid', `./custom_types/title` ],
	model: {
		filePath: path.resolve(__dirname, 'models'),
		ignore: /index|\.test/,
	    resolveName: function (name) {
	      return name.toLowerCase()
	    }
	}
});
```

#### models/Person.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Person = models.create('Person', {

	// If this is given and truthy, the mongoose-types timestamps
	// plugin will be loaded for this model creating automatically
	// updating 'createdAt' and 'updatedAt' properties
	useTimestamps: true,

	// Define your mongoose schema here
	schema: {
		firstName: String,
		lastName: String,

		// Special types like Email, Url, and ObjectId can be accessed
		// through the models.types object
		email: models.types.Email,
		website: models.types.Url
	},

	// Instance methods can be defined here, eg.
	//
	//  Person.findOne({ firstName: 'bob' }, function(err, bob) {
	//    bob.sendEmail(...);
	//  });
	//
	methods: {

		sendEmail: function(subject, msg) {
			someMailingLib.sendEmail(this.email, subject, msg);
		}

	},

	// Anything other than the above properties is considered a static
	// properties and stored directly on the model, eg.
	//
	//  Person.findByName('bob', function(err, bob) {
	//    ...
	//  });
	//
	findByName: function(name, callback) {
		name = name.split(' ');
		var lookup = { firstName: name[0] };
		if (name.length > 1) {
			lookup.lastName = name.pop();
		}
		Person.findOne(lookup, callback);
	}

});
```

#### some-other-file.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Person = models.require('Person')();

Person.findByName('bob', function(err, bob) {

});
```

### Circular References

Circular references are rather messy in Mongoose. To make this much easier there is built-in support for circular references in mongoose-models. For example, say you have two models:

#### Foo.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Bar = models.require('Bar')();

models.create('Foo', {
	schema: {
		bar: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: Bar }
	}
});
```

#### Bar.js

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

var Foo = models.require('Foo')();

models.create('Bar', {
	schema: {
		foo: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: Foo }
	}
});
```

This doesn't work because the models are trying to reference each other before they have been created. To make this work, we change the `ref` value like so in both files:

```javascript
{
	bar: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: {$circular: 'Bar'} }
}
```

```javascript
{
	foo: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: {$circular: 'Foo'} }
}
```

Now everything works as expected. There is also a shorter version of this if a model needs to reference itself recursively.

```javascript
var models = require('mongoose-models');

models.create('Baz', {
	schema: {
		child: { type: models.types.ObjectId, ref: '$circular' }
	}
});
```

### models.require(...)

The `models.require` method that loads models does not return the model directly, but instead returns a function that can be used to fetch the model. This is so that when two models make use of each other, the models are allowed time to set themselves up. That is why models are loaded as `models.require(...)()`. This returned function has a number of properties on it that can be used as well.

#### models.require(...).model

The model function itself (once defined). This is the same as what is returned from the getter function.

#### models.require(...).schema

The mongoose schema object. This can be accessed immediately without waiting for the model to be created if you need access sooner. This could be used as an alternative to the `$circular` syntax described above.

#### models.require(...).resolve( callback )

Defines a callback to be run once the model has been created.

```javascript
var Foo = models.require('Foo');
Foo.resolve(function() { Foo = Foo.model; });
```

### Debugging REPL

The REPL is a simple JavaScript interpreter with access to your mongoose-models. Before using the REPL, it will need to be loaded and configured.

```bash
$ cp ./node_modules/mongoose-models/bin/repl.js ./repl.js
```

Now, open up `repl.js` and change the values in `conf` to match your configuration settings. You can start the REPL by running:

```bash
$ node repl.js
```

The REPL comes with some helpful features on top of the standard node REPL. First, mongoose-models is already loaded for you and is available as `models`. Second, `models.require` has been patched to automatically store loaded models in `global`. There are also some useful functions defined.

```javascript
Loading REPL...
> models.require('Foo');
undefined
> Foo.find({ }, store('foos'));
{ ... }
>
Stored 2 arguments in "foos"
> print(foos);
{
  '1': ...
  '2': ...
  ...
}
```
